Things have been said to me. I'm just going to say I'm with Martin Morgan at
Black Rock Fishery near Chepstone. I'm okay to say near Chepstone. Yeah. Monday
January the 21st I think. I think. Right. Okay. Yeah this fishery was...
I'm going to sit a bit closer. There were three fisheries on the 7 Estuary of the Esk District.
The 7 District and the Wye District. So it was basically that the Estuary, there was lines drawn
of the Estuary and you'd have the 7, the Esk and the Wye Districts. People often
you know sort of misled into thinking we were fishing on the Wye because people
would be told they fish on the Wye but they would actually say in the Wye
District. The Black Rock Lave Net Fishery is the last fishery remaining on
what was fished in the Wye District. There were stop boats, tuck nets,
sane nets. Lave nets actually on the Wye but we fish in the Estuary and it's a
defined area called Gruggy Rocks and that's the last of the Wye District.
Fishermen from the past there was a guy called Ron, Ron Williams and I actually
had his license. When Ron dropped the license he wasn't actually dead. He was one of the
few that sort of gave up a license without dying. But Ron was a character, he was an ex-Royal Marine and one of the
stories he told me years ago was that when he was a boy growing up in the
village he came home on a weekend on a Sunday with a salmon under his arm. He
found in one of the pools, brought it home to the house and his father gave
him a good hammering and he said why do you do that? He said he wasn't for bringing the
fish home at all, he was for bringing it home on a Sunday.
He did sabbath. So he was a sabbath and he gave him a hammering but a clip-row mirror and it was purely because he did it on a Sunday.
Mentioned it on Sundays, Doug Brown another old fisherman, picture of him on the wall there through his years.
Dougie was a keen fisherman, sort of started off when he was a young boy, sort of
coming down with the older fishermen, sort of looking after the boat and it was a habit of
them to go across the estuary from Black Rock to the English side, there's a hotel,
what they call the New Passage Hotel and they would go over there for a pint on a Sunday and any other day they could as well I think.
But especially on a Sunday because Wales was dry and pubs weren't open on a Sunday and Dougie used to say
they would go across on a boat, row across on the path of the New Passage and Doug would be left at the pill there on the other side to look after the boat
once they went in through the booze up and then come back.
And they would also, with the boat they would go upstream as well and there's a per-but, I can't remember the name of it but there's a per-what's it called?
Anyway, it wasn't unusual for them to travel around the estuary for their fun and having a drink and meeting other fishermen.
It was a different time.
Ron, well Ron will get up to another story.
Bob Leonard and Pete Leonard were fishermen in my day.
Their father Grant Lee also fished.
Grant Lee was a bit of a character. Bob used to say he liked a beer, he liked a butcher, a coalman, sort of everything really, jack of all trades but also a fisherman.
When Grant Lee died, on the day he died, there used to be a path from Blackrock through to Port Scud and Subrock.
You could get a car along before the cliff all fell in.
They were taking Grant Lee's coffin along the cliff path there.
I always think of it as Grant Lee's last fish because as they were going across up the path they looked over to what we call the salmon pools and there was a fish kicking up in the pool.
Bob said he looked at Pete, Pete looked at Bob and Pete had run back to the house, got his waders and his net and went down and picked the fish up on the day Grant Lee's been gone.
That's fantastic.
Oh, what a good story.
I told you the one about Bob and the...
Prince Philip?
Prince Philip, yeah, I told you that.
Bob was back in the 50s when my great grandfather caught the monster fish.
I told you that story.
He actually said that the following day he went down there and he seen an even bigger fish.
He said he stood there in the same place, in the hole, just off Subrock, and a fish came through at about half tide and he said the water, as the fish was coming through the shallows,
was going as high as the top of a Land Rover, sort of, with the power of the fish going through and he reckons that was bigger.
Sounds like a shark.
Yeah, that big old fish.
Have you ever found any unusual fish out there?
Yeah, the most unusual fish I ever caught out there was a common carp in the 7S tree, which is, you know, only the year of it I'd seen one once and it was on.
On an occasion that my brother and I had been fishing down the hole, again, down off Subrock, and we caught a salmon.
We had a salmon with us and we were coming back, part of the boat up in the bay at Black Rock, and we were walking past what we called the pool, and there was a fish moving in the pool.
I can see the mark of it, sort of a bit of a ripple on the surface.
So we opened the net out and jumped in, scooped the fish up, and to my great surprise, at the bottom of the net was a carp about four and a half, five pound.
And it's not something you would usually get in the 7S tree, but at that time we were having torrential rain, constant torrential rain, and when we were actually fishing in the S tree,
you'd be stood mid-channel and looking back upstream to the old bridge and it would just be like a forest with the amount of wood washed out of the rivers.
There was so much wood being washed out, so much fresh water coming into the S tree.
I mean, there was just hundreds and hundreds of trees and branches and, you name it, it was in the beer garden tables.
So what had happened there was a fish somewhere along the line had been washed out of a river.
I think it's someone's pond.
It's a bit of the most unusual fish I've ever seen out there.
We've seen porpoise out there, you know, whilst we've been going fishing.
Seals, seals have come through one day. I wasn't actually fishing, but there were three or four of them stood in what we call the gut.
There was a massive seal that went through there, sort of, we don't know how much water it got through there, I don't know, but it went between the fishermen.
Then it was as big as the fishermen as well, it was huge.
Oh, wow. Yeah.
But we often see a seal out there during the season.
I noticed there was somebody put something up on one of your Facebook posts and it was a woman talking about nets at Camp Road or something.
She, I can't remember the name of the woman.
Yeah, she bought my great-grandfather's, my grandparents' house, 13 Camp Road, which I say back in the day was called HQ.
And there had always been laid nets at the back, sort of left there.
And when they bought the house, there must have been a couple of old nets left there.
But yeah, the back kitchen was where they brought the fish and put them in a tin bath.
That's enough back in the day.
But the back of that garden comes out onto the sub rock camp and then it was a short walk down for them down onto the cliff, down onto what we call the Winkle Beds.
The Winkle Beds, which is a little reef just basically right in front of the house sort of thing in the estuary.
So you were going Winkle Picking then?
Winkle Bed, no.
There were Winkles there, not in any great quantities when I was a kid.
I mean, you did see the shells and you could, if you wanted to, guess, but I've never done it.
But somebody at some point in time must have collected Winkles down there.
The pollution situation down there was so bad, I can't imagine in the 60s and 70s anybody would want to eat a Winkle.
Is that because the ship building nearby?
No, it was the paper mill discharge point was not too far from there.
And that area was heavily polluted, very heavily polluted.
And you had Britannia Sink in the estuary opposite.
I read a book recently, a MacGreen piecebook, and it recommended that basically you don't eat the fish.
Or if you did, you don't eat very much of it.
You know, sort of the, you know, the cellulose flounders, things that live in the estuary, shellfish, daffodil would be a big no-no.
I was speaking to somebody last week and his great-grandfather used to climb the cliffs that overlook the Wye towards Chepstone.
Towards Chepstone for seagulls eggs. Did anyone ever do that?
Yeah, that was my great-grandfather William Corbyn.
Their family is from Chepstone and he got his nickname Nester from his habit of climbing the cliffs in Chepstone collecting seagulls eggs.
And he used to do that and also used to dive or jump off the old rowey bridge, crossing the Wye as well.
He also with Nester, William Corbyn, my great-grandfather, there's a rock named after him out in what we call the hole.
And Nester's rock is the name of the rock and all it is really is a small rock about three foot by three foot, 18 inches high.
And he was quite short, he was perhaps, I don't know exactly, five foot four, five foot five, a worry little fella.
And he would always be last out of the boat and he would always stand on that rock because it just allowed him to get out of the boat a little bit earlier.
When you start fishing the water is sort of up to the top of your chest where you just put it.
Nester's rock and that rock is named after him.
Do you know anything about the fisheries that are downstream like Goldcliff?
No, I don't know a huge amount about them really. They were mainly basket fisheries.
And by that do you mean like putcher?
Putchers, yeah, conical baskets originally made from willow and hazel.
There will be hundreds of baskets in some ranks set to a scaffold usually facing the ebb tide.
They aren't set on a slight incline and the salmon swim in, they've got no reverse gear, they can't get back out.
The tide goes out and the fisherman comes along and collects the catch.
The ones in sort of recent times, not recent times, in memory then, the Undy putcher rank, the Porton putcher rank and the Goldcliff putcher rank.
There's three main ones.
And they know that the Undy rank was, what happened there was that the number of baskets was reduced down to 150 baskets,
perhaps in the 60s by the Natural Rivers Authority and it became uneconomic to use.
Porton, I'm not sure when that closed, but Goldcliff closed in 1995, bought out by Anglin Interests and the Environment Agency, but closed down, all never to return.
The other basket fishery was not salmon fishery, it was putts or kipes.
They were medieval baskets fished in groups of perhaps six, seven, eight and they were used to catch white fish made from hazeln and willow as well in three sections.
I can't remember the four wheel, I can't remember the names of them, but a kite or putt was used to catch white fish and shrimp.
Same thing applies with face the ebb tide, the fish pushed in by the tide and then the fish will come along at low tide when they're dry and take the end basket off and take the catcher.
We found baskets buried in the clay that are kipes and putts or these things at hundreds if not a thousand years old on the estuary.
Just amazing. Did you ever lay eel traps on the reams?
No, no, no. We've never trapped fish in the reams, but as a kid we would catch stiltbacks and eels and newts and the like in the reams. They seemed to be a lot cleaner back then.
But I've never seen locally anybody trap fish like that.
We used to fish, as kids we'd go fishing in the in the in the pills we used to call them sort of San Pierre pill was a good one, sort of very natural sort of pill.
Not been evened out, scraped out, it was just like a meandering sort of brook really, but still a pill.
And we'd fish with a rod and line for you get flounders and little eels and things up in those.
The only other fishing we really done sort of, you know, obviously rod and line fishing, but we'd also go congering years ago, sort of out on the bedwinds at low tide.
And that involved walking out to rocky areas in the estuary with a bar, iron bar and poking it under a rock, rattling the rock about and then hopefully there'd be an eel under there.
And he'd come out and you'd take it and kill it at the table.
Into an egg?
No, just that it would wriggle out onto the stones, onto the shingle or whatever and you'd just dump him on the head and take him out.
You'd have to be quick wouldn't you?
Once they're out there they've got nowhere to go.
Right, they're really quick.
Is a conger eel different to an eel?
Just bigger generally.
You wouldn't get those up in the reams then?
No, no, no, not in a ream. You'd have a green eel, what you'd call a green eel, and silver reels, hidden reams and alvers, live in reams.
But do you know that reams, they're very unique to this area, aren't they really?
So is it something as a kid, young children did, they just played in around the reams?
Yeah I think they would.
Were there many reams? Do they have different names?
No, I can't think of any names from reams at all. It would just be pills.
I mean, all the reams run out of the pills then into the estuary.
As far as the Black Rock, Lavenette fishing grounds go in the surrounding areas, I mean you've got San Pierre pill, and reams would run into that.
The pill is the outlet to the estuary, isn't it? But the reams run into the pill.
And then you've got what we call little pill, again, reams run into that.
And then you've got Calicot pill.
And then you might have got, after that, no sorry, going back that way again towards Chepstow you've got Mathen pill.
So west of the sub-rook you've got Calicot pill, Collister pill, and then Magor pill.
Might be a couple more further west again. But basically all the reams run into those, and that's the end left of the estuary.
It's quite interesting, Calicot pill, when the, what was it, the Troggy River, Troggy, T-R-O-W-G-Y, was diverted.
Don't ask me when. Then it was diverted into Calicot pill.
And Calicot pill runs out across the foreshore, through the seawall, and then out across the mud to the black bed winds.
And then empties a mile offshore into a fishing place we call the Luby, which is a pretty popular,
it used to be a popular, a pretty popular fishing place.
Out there you've got various gullies that used to be used for fishing, for whitefish.
One is called the cannibal gut. And cannibal gut, gut is a name we use for a channel basically.
Is that G-U-T-T? Yeah, G-U-T, just gut.
And that's the channel used for, we fish in.
And that cannibal gut, we call that the cannibal gut because it's about the only area on the estuary we find cannibals, obviously.
So hence the cannibal gut. You find cannibals? Yeah, lots of cannibals out there.
Really? When we were kids we tried to carry them back and sort of get halfway back and just dump them.
But yeah, there's two sizes, one's just behind you there, there's two behind me.
Oh my god. We're not sure if a ship sunk or if it was, we just don't know.
There's one specific area covering five or six hundred meters, sort of where there's cannibals.
That's amazing. Do you ever find the remains of old boats or anything like that?
Yeah, there's one, the John, that was run aground on gruggy rocks in, I think it was 1942.
She was, I think carrying coal, wrecked on the rocks.
And she's well broken up now, but you can still identify the riveted construction, the portals, the chain.
Oh gosh. We found a wooden boat or parts of a wooden boat in the sands, on the Bedwind Sands.
It was out there recently actually and she's covered up again.
You put that on Facebook, didn't you? Yeah.
You can just see the keel. No, no, no, that was a rib, we found that was just a rib.
It is on Facebook somewhere, but that was just a rib we found.
I was walking out there and I found a rib of a boat.
But also in another spot, there's a wooden boat, plenty of iron on it, sort of the brackets that's what we first spotted.
Went back out there and then more of the boat had been exposed, but a few weeks ago she'd been covered up again.
So things on the sands, it's constantly changing.
It's a shifting sand type there, isn't it? Yeah, it changes every day.
It depends which way the wind is blowing.
And part of the fishing is keeping an eye on things every season.
We like going out there, not all of us, but there's three or four of us that spend quite a bit of time out there.
We look after it, make sure there's no netting and all the rest of it.
But of interest is things you find.
Clay pipes, Roman pottery, all sorts of things.
And it's just people are going out there forever.
A couple of weeks ago, it was quite funny really.
I was out there and I found a pelvic, like a bonesy pelvis sort of thing.
You're joking.
I found a few things and I was carrying it around.
So I got back to the car and I found, I think it's something to do with target practice on airplanes, but again I put it on Facebook.
And I sent two photographs to one of the boys.
We got like a WhatsApp thing for photographs.
So I sent it to him.
Don't pick these up.
It's afternoon.
Anyway, within 15 minutes, Matthew, one of them, come back.
He sent me some pictures.
It's human.
And I'm looking at these pictures now and I'm looking at the bone and the sockets and all the rest of it.
That's weird, Martin.
I know.
What are you doing?
I'm looking at it.
So I found, we got in contact with one of the Coast Guard guys.
Richard, he always wants, if you find a bomb, he wants to know and stuff like this.
He keeps them in work.
So I said, Rich, I think, I'm not sure I said, but one of the boys has just sent me a picture.
And I've just phoned somebody.
They might be human.
He said, right.
He said, well, do you want us to come down now?
I said, no.
He said, not tonight.
No.
I can't have the police up my house.
So we'd sort it out tomorrow.
So they come down to Blackrock.
I brought it down there and they took it off.
But only yesterday.
I didn't say nothing about it.
But yesterday, he texted and said, it's not a human remains.
So it's not.
God knows what it is.
It is then.
You'd be a big, big cow or something.
A sheep or something.
No, I didn't know.
No, you wouldn't, would you?
And the more you looked at the pictures, it looked...
You were convinced.
Yeah, we all...
And Matthew then texted me.
He was still out there.
He said, I've got it in the back of the car.
I said, I've been carrying it around for now.
And he said, how big is it?
And I put a tape on it when I got home.
And I sent it in the measurements.
And I woked it off my phone, but it was absolutely comical.
Matthew was a big lump.
And he's there in his kitchen now.
He's measuring it.
And then he said, I think it's human.
The way he said it.
See, that thing's just...
But yeah, a day in the life of somebody.
Have you seen bodies out there?
Richard found one, yeah.
Richard found Derek Upton.
He found two.
He found one on the way.
He was canoeing, kayaking up the way.
And he came across one.
And he phoned the coast guard.
And they sent Sarah out.
And they said, can you hold on to it?
He said he's drifting away.
So you have to sort of catch hold of it with a stick or something.
Oh, dear.
And then, a few years back now, Richard was...
Derek Upton, I don't know if you heard of him.
He's a big guy.
He was involved with a lot of the findings out there.
He was kind of like a pill fella.
And he used to take the archaeologists out there.
Sort of off Goldcliff.
They found these footprints and all the rest of it.
And he spent a lot of time out there.
He knew it like the back of his hand.
Like if you were arrested.
And he don't know what happened.
They don't know the personal side of it.
But anyway, eventually he went down there.
He shot himself.
So he shot himself down on the foreshore.
And I think they found the rifle.
But they couldn't find his body.
So they searched around a bit for it.
Sent a few search parties down there for a week or so.
And no sign of him.
They just assumed he'd gone.
Anyway, my brother was down there doing what we do, I think.
And he found the body.
Didn't have a mobile.
So we walked up to the phone box.
Said he found the body.
And within seconds he was like, please guess.
A grim discovery though.
That must impact on him a bit.
Yeah.
Not very nice.
So yeah, Richard, when we was talking to him.
He said there's still, when we set up the pelvic bone.
He said there's still three or four in the cabinet for us.
There's people jumping off the bridges all over the place.
Did people jump off the bridge?
Oh God, yeah. All the time.
What, the Seven Bridge?
No, the other one generally.
I think he said about the Clifton Bridge.
I don't know if they put barriers up on the Clifton.
They try and stop people jumping off.
But they don't publicise it anymore.
Because it happens quite often.
It puts it in people's minds, doesn't it?
I had no idea that happened.
People are jumping off every day, but it's several a year.
It's very sad. Desperate people must feel to do that.
Yeah, it is sad.
Changing subject.
What about knots? Were you taught knots?
Because you were using your boat in your morgue.
Obviously to knit the nets.
Using the sheet bend to knit the nets.
You're using a sheet bend.
Sheet bend.
As in bed sheet.
Knitting the net around the wand and the needle and everything.
That's basically as far as late net fishing.
That's the only knot you need to know.
Because I got an interest in boats.
I mean bow lines and stuff like that.
Clove hitches.
It's part of it.
Boating.
About women. Did you ever get women to knit fish?
No, never.
It's not a reason why they couldn't do it.
I've never known anybody, not a woman, do that.
No.
What about words that go with the area?
The estuary, the black rock, the levels.
Any particular words that, like you said about the guts for example?
Well yeah, I mean there's the monkey temp.
Which is behind a reef that's behind that hole.
There's quite an interesting story with that.
What year it would have been I just don't know.
But around war time, sort of that time.
Four soldiers stole the boat from the fishermen.
And they tried to get a couple of girls from the village to sort of go in the boat with them.
And in the end the girls didn't go.
Anyway the soldiers went off in the boats.
And the guests from the bay.
And rode out into the estuary.
And landed on what they call the monkey temp.
At lower tide.
Got out of the boats.
Started to walk around the reef, the island.
Didn't secure the boat.
The tide started to come back in and wash the boat away.
And Bob used to say that if they watched them, they couldn't do nothing.
So the tide came in and people were saying, get another boat, go and get them.
They just sort of said, too late.
Why?
Too late, they couldn't get to them.
Because the tide is so strong?
Because the tide is coming in so fast.
And they just watched them.
How awful.
Oh my god.
Drammed all of them.
All of them lost.
Was it called monkey temp before that?
No, we don't know where the name monkey temp came from.
But generally the monkey temp comes up.
It's an indication of the time when you start to see the monkey temp come up in the distance.
That's when you set off from the bay to go to the hole in the boat to start fishing.
There's another stone out there called, just again close to the hole.
Called the sugar cube.
Sugar cube.
It's a big, massive square rock.
There's two ways of getting out to the fishing.
If you're going to fish a grand stand in the hole.
And that was either by boat and you're looking for the monkey temp coming up.
If you're wading from the shore outwards, you stand on the edge of the water as the tide is going out.
And then you start to see the top of the sugar cube up here.
As the tide is ebbing.
And as soon as the top of that stone starts to show, that's when you're starting to wade out.
That's what you're looking for all the time.
So you know exactly the right signs and timings.
You're reading it all the time, aren't you?
Yeah.
There's certain things you look for all the time.
When you're fishing out in Gruggy, which is mid-channel, close to the main shipping channel.
You can get cut off quite easily.
When you're on foot, you're going to drown if you don't come back at the right time.
So what you're looking for is the tide rising in the shipping channel.
That's what you do.
People, if you're looking around you, you think the tide is not coming in.
But what we do is pick out black.
You're looking for black.
That's what they say.
Look for the black, which is stone.
So as the tide is ebbing, you can imagine, you get a rock shot.
And then you wait a little bit longer.
And then you look beyond that for another rock.
And then another rock will start to show.
And you keep looking beyond and beyond and beyond.
And you're looking down into the shipping channel.
And then you're looking around.
And then you look glanced back.
And that rock is gone.
So that's the only indication you've got that the tide is coming in.
Because you can't see around you, where you've come from, to the east or the west.
You're just looking at that.
So when the tide is starting to rise now,
and that's your first indication of you've got to be thinking of leaving.
So you're reading that all the time?
Yeah.
The most important thing is safety.
And they say if you see a fish at the end,
when the time comes to leave, you leave.
You don't sort of hang about.
So you're constantly reading the water, looking at the turn of the tide.
And when I was a kid, I mean, you could actually hear it.
I can always remember, I'm going back a long time, but...
Before the bridges?
Before the bridges.
Before the bridge.
If you hear the bridge now, you can hear the drone and the traffic.
And sometimes it's a lot worse than that in the fishing areas.
You can be stood in the hole and fishing,
and I could be there with my eyes closed,
and I would know exactly when to come back.
Because not only are you looking, I would know exactly when to come back.
Because what happens in the estuary is that when the tide starts to flood,
you don't sort of just pour in straight away.
It's as if you reach a sort of a level.
The tide starts to rise and rise and rise and rise,
and then it reaches a point and it goes...
Like that, and it starts to come in.
So, as long as it's flowing, flowing out,
you will always hear the water going over the rocks.
All right? So you're listening.
So if you were blind, you couldn't see, you would hear it.
That ripple in, that water going over the rocks.
When everything becomes equal,
for 10 seconds, 15 seconds, 20 seconds, there's no noise.
So you know then, just before it's going to tip.
That's interesting.
So that sense was heightened even more so when the bridge wasn't there.
Yeah, exactly.
You could hear it much better.
Yeah, it was a definite sort of thing that you would listen for.
The turn of the tide sort of thing.
But with the background noise, that's sort of lost now.
If you really, really sort of listen for it, you can...
Yeah, but it was, like you say, well defined and sort of before the bridge was there.
So this is your chance now to tell me anything I haven't asked.
Or also what this place means to you.
Well, the fishing.
Black rock.
Black rock, it means everything to me.
It really does. It's sort of...
Had I not been taken out fishing when I was a kid,
I mean none of this would be here.
I never thought it at the time that I'd ever be here,
all these years trying to hang on to the fishing.
It's a massive part of my life sort of thing now.
And who would have ever thought it?
It was tetra on the brink of going.
And the hard work that I put in, my brothers put in, the other fishermen have put in.
And sort of it just means everything to me, really.
And I just hope it stays forever.
But yeah, a massive part of my life.
It's become more so as I've got older.
When you appreciate things that have, you know...
It's a material world, but some things are worth more than money.
And this is a gift to me, really.
When the fishing time comes, you can't think of anything else, really.
It's like drawn.
Like the moon draws and the sun controls the tides, the drag.
The tide, you sort of get drawn to the estuary as well.
It's a massive part.
I wouldn't say I'd be lost without it, but it would be a crying shame if it went.
It really would.
There's no reason for it to go.
We have no effect on stock at all.
I'm proud of the way things are now.
It's become not just a big thing for me, it's become a big thing for the village, the county, everything.
I could never have imagined how things would have turned out.
Heritage fishery, tourist attraction, I suppose.
We've given a lot back to Mormon ship, one way or another, and Wales.
It does really mean everything to me.
It really does.
There's nothing else I'd rather be doing, really, than leave the estates.
Thank you.
It's only been quite emotional.
It is, I mean, it is.
It's quite an emotional subject, really.
There's a lot to lose.
We fought hard to keep it, and we're still fighting even now.
Who knows?
It's out of my hands.
What will be will be.
Watch this space.
We'll give it your best shot next week.
Yeah, we do. We'll certainly do that.
Thanks, Martin.
It's all right.
Thank you.
No problem.